{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Student Software Engineer\
\
The Company:\
iRobot designs and builds robots that make a difference. iRobot was founded in 1990 by Massachusetts Institute of Technology roboticists with the vision of making practical robots a reality. In 2012, iRobot generated $436 million in revenue and employed more than 500 of the robot industry\'92s top professionals, including mechanical, electrical and software engineers and related support staff. iRobot stock trades on the NASDAQ stock market under the ticker symbol IRBT.\
\
iRobot\'92s corporate headquarters are located in Bedford, Mass. The company also has offices in California, the United Kingdom, China and Hong Kong.\
iRobot has made some of the world\'92s most important robots. iRobot\'92s home robots are revolutionizing the way people clean \'96 inside and out. More than 9 million home robots have been sold worldwide. The award-winning iRobot Roomba vacuum cleaning robot is leading the charge. Roomba made practical robots a reality for the first time and showed the world that robots are here to stay. iRobot\'92s acclaimed line of home robots also includes the iRobot Scooba floor washing robot, the iRobot Mirra pool cleaning robot and the iRobot Looj gutter cleaning robot.\
\
As a pioneer in the robot industry, iRobot\'92s goal is to drive innovation, serve as an industry catalyst and change the world by fueling the era of robots.\
To support and encourage the development of robot technology, iRobot offers comprehensive resources for third-party developers, providing information and products that facilitate the creation and easy integration of new payloads, behaviors and capabilities on iRobot platforms. iRobot collaborates with external developers from government agencies, academic institutions and small and large businesses to create and bring to market innovations that help warfighters and public safety professionals tackle dangerous missions with less risk. With more than two decades of leadership in the robot industry, iRobot remains committed to providing platforms for invention and discovery, developing key partnerships to foster technological\
exploration and building robots that improve the quality of life and safety standards\
worldwide.\
\
\
Position Purpose:\
Design, implement, test, and document robotics and vision algorithms in C/C++ on desktop and embedded platforms. The candidate will participate in the creation of the next generation of consumer robotics products developed at iRobot.\
\
The position\'92s responsibilities also include validation and characterization of the products developed at iRobot including embedded solutions for vision and navigation, robotics components, and hardware. The position involves a substantial portion of \'93hands-on\'94 work and requires an individual able to work independently with minimal supervision.\
\
Requirements:\
\
Mandatory:\
\'95 Hands-on experience developing robotics or vision systems.\
\'95 Working knowledge of C and Python.\
\'95 Working understanding of compilers and programming language design.\
\'95 Experience with Git.\
\'95 Experience validating complex systems involving hardware, software, and mechanical components.\
\'95 A solid engineering background with hands-on design and development experience.\
\'95 Excellent verbal and written communications skills.\
\'95 Strong problem solving and analytical skills.\
\'95 Ability to learn quickly.\
\
Nice to have:\
\'95 Ability to build/assemble/modify electronic assemblies or robots into various configurations\
for test purposes.\
\'95 Understanding of and experience with any of the following: behavior-based control, navigation,\
path-planning, obstacle avoidance, SLAM, estimation and control.\
\'95 Understanding of and experience with any of the following: object recognition, structure\
from motion, 3D reconstruction, ego-motion estimation, feature extraction and matching,\
face recognition.\
\'95 Hands-on design and development experience of software and hardware products.\
\'95 Experience developing embedded systems.\
\'95 Experience validating consumer or robotics products.}